---
layout: post
title: Rumors Set
description: Designed and built a set for Neil Simon's <i>Rumors</i>
thumbnail: assets/img/rumors/stgL-empty(thumb).jpg
date: 2022-04-10
tags: school-project theatre CAD
---
-----
{% include figure.liquid path="assets/img/rumors/stgL-empty.jpg" title="Close up view of completed set" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}

My senior year of high school, I had the opportunity to design and build a set for York Suburban Trojan Theatre's production of <i>Our Town</i> by Neil Simon. The show is set in a grand 1980s mansion, and I was tasked with capturing this aesthetic. With input from our other student leaders and faculty directors, I designed the set from the description provided by the script and a number of reference photos we found from other productions of this farce. 

After settling on the style and layout, I made a detailed 2D layout of the set in Fusion 360. From there, I expanded the model into 3D to plan the actual construction of the set. From this structural model, I made drawings to use when constructing the set.

<div class="row justify-content-sm-center">
    <div class="col-md-8 align-self-center">
        {% include figure.liquid path="assets/img/rumors/drawp1.png" title="Completed 3D construction model of the set" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="row justify-content-sm-center">
    <div class="col-md mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid path="assets/img/rumors/drawp2.png" title="2D overview drawing" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
    <div class="col-md mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid path="assets/img/rumors/drawp5.png" title="Stair stringer drawing" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
    <div class="col-md mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid path="assets/img/rumors/drawp7.png" title="Balcony drawing with banister spacings" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
</div>
The design work was not done all at once, but overlapped somewhat with construction as the schedule was quite tight. Once deciding on an initial floor-plan, I designed the framing for the walls, and from there we began construction. I led a team of 6 other students for the construction, working from the plans I generated and parallelizing the process as much as possible to finish before the show. Alongside this construction work, I continued to design the details of the set, laying out the stairs, entry-window, and banisters so that once the walls were complete we moved on to these details.
<div class="row justify-content-sm-center">
    <div class="col-sm-9 align-self-center">
        {% include figure.liquid path="assets/img/rumors/construction-1.jpg" title="Set viewed from center house" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
    <div class="col-sm-9 align-self-center">
        {% include figure.liquid path="assets/img/rumors/construction-2.jpg" title="Actors on the completed set" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
</div>

Overall, I managed to get the project finished on time and was very satisfied with the results, especially considering it was my first time taking on a project of this magnitude. Building from my own drawings with other people quickly taught me the importance of clear dimensioning, and I learned to balance my team across construction, painting, and other details in order to reduce bottlenecks. The cast was thrilled with the final result, and it was an incredible learning opportunity.

<div class="row justify-content-sm-center">
    <div class="col-sm-9 align-self-center">
        {% include figure.liquid path="assets/img/rumors/Square-house.jpg" title="Set viewed from center house" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
    <div class="col-sm-9 align-self-center">
        {% include figure.liquid path="assets/img/rumors/AllActors.jpg" title="Actors on the completed set" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
</div>